William Eno

Edward Basset

Harland Bartholmew

Victor Gruen

The High Cost of Free Parking and the Automobile City
The School of Architecture - Georgia Institute of Technology
ARCH4151 + ARCH7151 - HISTORY OF URBAN FORM

Why Do American Cities Look Like This?
(This could be anywhere, but it is also everywhere)

The Anglo-American Suburb

The Public Menace of Blight

The High Cost of Free Parking

The right to access every building in the city by private motorcar, in an age when
everyone owns such a vehicle, is actually the right to destroy the city.
Louis Mumford

The Anglo-American Suburb – The Garden Suburb

The Public Menace of Blight

The High Cost of Free Parking

Why Do American Cities Look Like This?
Subdivision Regulation – from the SCPEA

The purpose of the Master Plan and Subdivision Regulations, according to the SCPEA is to plan the public domain in advance of private
development, including the boundaries of streets, parks, public buildings and other public spaces and places.
Today, in most cities, a master plan does not set out the public domain in advance for three reasons. Legally, a land use plan, not a plan for the
public domain, is required to support a zoning plan. And, legally, a city cannot designate land for public acquisition or private land without
completing that acquisition within a limited amount of time – a few years at most. Cities are unwilling to act that far in advance. Third, cities
increasingly export the cost of acquiring and building the public domain to private developers, who then follow plan the “public” domain within
their private properties.
This results in land use regulations for each zoning district determine the design of the public domain, except for highways and major and minor
arterial roads and regional parks. The Master Plan is oriented to land uses and zoning, not the building of a public domain.

Zoning – from SZEA and Euclid v. Ambler Realty

Justice Sutherland, who wrote the Euclid decision - , was concerned primarily with land use issues, not the other issues in the NYC 1916 Zoning
Resolution – building height, coverage, density, etc. And his primary concern was the protection of single-family neighborhoods and restricting any
mixture of apartment buildings. He also did not reference that zoning in NYC and other cities’ overlaid on a Master Plan of the public domain, like
the 1811 Commissioners Plan.
When the legality of zoning is primarily concerned with land uses – and the separation of uses as argued by Sutherland – the Master Plan becomes
a mirror of the Zoning Plan. This is the opposite of the history of urban form, especially in the US where plans for the public domain – New York,
Philadelphia, Savannah, Detroit, New Orleans, San Francisco and hundreds of others – always preceded any designation of uses.

Parking Regulations – emerging from standard zoning, city planning policy, and traffic engineering.

The purpose of streets is to provide access to private property and mobility within and through the city and at the beginning of the First Motor age,
the street (meaning the public domain) also served for the storage of automobiles – parking. When traffic volumes became an issue, parking was
exported to zoning and built on private parcels and private uses. With parking part of private development – like shopping malls – parking
requirements were sized to accommodate the traffic generated by the uses – at peak days and hours. For example, Black Friday at shopping malls
or the Saturday and Sunday before Thanksgiving for supermarkets. Thus, everyone pays for parking on private parcels through the prices of
clothing or groceries or any other product that is part urban development.

The High Cost of Free Parking and the Automobile City

Before the Motor Age
The First Motor Age
The Second Motor Age
The Second Motor Age
The Bartholomew Effect
Invention of the Shopping Mall
The High Cost of Free Parking

Zoning, Subdivision Regulation and Parking Requirements have reversed the history of urban
form. If we look around, visual evidence states clearly: automobile culture and parking
requirements are the most important contributions to the form of contemporary cities.

Before the Motor Age
The Streetcar City and Suburb Before the Automobile

Downtown Atlanta, c. 1920

Atlanta Trolley Map c. 1915

Ponce de Leon Amusement Park and Cracker Stadium c. 1911

Streetcar and the Subdivision Plat – Curbstoners

Virginia Highland – 1872, 1893,1911, 1917.

Virginia Highlands – 22 Plats laid out by 12 Curbstoners between 1908 and1928

The Homebuilder
Rectangular Lot - 40 to 60 foot width and 125 to 175 depth.
Rectangular Blocks, except when responding to prior boundaries or topographic conditions.
Three house types built in many styles (Victorian, Classic Revival, Tudor, etc.)
Frequent alleys for access to rear yards for horse and carriage and, later, automobiles.
The rear yard – a place of work with clothes lines and gardens and, a stable for a horse and carriage
Front yard always a grass lawn – J.B. Jackson called it ”the ghost at the door”
The car replaced the horse and carriage in the back yard until the garage was domesticated

Shotgun/Bungalow
One floor
Two floor
Perpendicular to the
street
American Single Family Housing Types – 1860’s -1950

Double Pen/Hall and
Parlor
One floor
Two floor
Parallel to the street

Four Square
One floor
Two floor
Square

The First Motor Age
Developed in Europe in the latter part of
the 19th century, and introduced to the
America soon after, the motor vehicle was
still a rare sight on the streets of American
cities in the early 1900s. At that time only
8,000 privately owned motor vehicles
had been registered in the entire country,
many of them propelled by steam. The
period from 1900 to 1929 saw the
introduction of nearly 1,200 new
automobile designs with various means of
self-propulsion.
This creative wave reached its peak in the
year 1907, when 92 new entrants
appeared on the landscape. In 1910,
American factories made 181,000
passenger cars and 6,000 trucks and
buses. In 1914, the production of motor
vehicles exceeded the output of horse
drawn wagons. By 1929, 23 million
vehicles were registered across the
United States. By the mid-20th century,
the motor vehicle was in full control of the
transportation scene and has remained
unchallenged since.

Street Design in the First Motor Age
The First Motor Age simply accommodated
the automobile into the existing street
structure of 19th c. America, whether it
was a gridiron like most cities, designed
cities like Savannah or Philadelphia , or the
incremental cities like Boston.
The First Motor Age also established the
standard dimensions for streets in
America’s expanding cities from 1900’s to
the 1929, whether the curvilinear streets of
Inman Park or the rectangular blocks of
Virginia Highland.
Older unpaved streets and most all new
streets were paved with 24 to 26 foot
cartways.
These streets, because their primary
purpose was the “right of way’ to
individual property, were organized into
dense networks of blocks. Few
neighborhoods were planned – one
“curbstoner” (a land developer) would
simply connect his streets to the next ones.
Virginia Highlands, for example, includes 22
separate land subdivisions over a period of
about 30 years.

William Phelps Eno and Traffic Plans in the First Motor Age
William Eno, 1858-1945, was the most important person in the First Motor Age. He recognized the
problems of traffic and accommodating traffic in the city even before the automobile arrived. He wrote
the first Traffic Code for New York and prepared the first traffic plans for London, Paris and other cities.
He invented the stop sign, the traffic signal, the traffic circle, the crosswalk, one-way streets, taxi stands.
He opposed pedestrian bridges, saying we had to learn to live with the automobile. He was an
accomplished horseman. He never drove an automobile.
His “Rules of the Road,” adopted by New York City in 1909, became the world’s first city traffic plan. He
also wrote the first-ever manual of police traffic regulations. In 1921, Eno established the Eno Foundation
for Highway Traffic Regulations, known today as the Eno Transportation Foundation, a nonprofit
organization dedicated to studying and promoting transportation safety.

Place Charles de Gaulle, Paris

Columbus Circle, Manhattan

Parking and the First Motor Age
Rank and Park
In the early 1900s two words defined what is currently known as “parking” in the United States: “to
rank” (ranking) and “to park” (parking). To rank was to stand vehicles (one behind the other)
parallel to the curb (usually with little space in between). To park was to stand vehicles (parallel to
one another) at an angle to the curb. “To rank” was derived from the term “cab rank,” which was
used in London, where cabs were positioned in taxi stands one behind the other in single file. The
term “to park” originated from the practice of placing cannon carriages parallel to one another; in
such a position these are said to be parked.
Dead or Alive
Cars left unattended on streets or in public areas were a major problem for cities at the turn of the
20th century. As traffic regulations evolved, codifying the use and control of parked cars was
addressed by a clear designation of occupancy while the cars were “parking” or “ranking.” Early
codes suggest two definitions of automobile parking: “live” and “dead.” A live vehicle is one whose
driver is present and prepared to move the vehicle; a “dead” vehicle is one whose driver is absent
or unable to move the vehicle. The issue of dead vehicles was seen as especially problematic at a
time of no clearly designated parking and few ranked vehicles. During this time, chauffeured private
cars were more prevalent than single-driver cars; this led to the theory that ranking could operate
successfully only with live cars.
Cars left unattended on streets or in public areas were a major problem for cities at the turn of the
20th century.
Eno writes: “When vehicles are ranked, no one of them can move out of the line independently of
the others, unless considerable waste space is allowed for between them, whereas when they are
parked, being parallel to one another, any one of them can get away without causing any other one
to move.”

Parking Class
The inefficiency associated with parallel curb parking prompted two suggestions by traffic
legislators: to restrict curb parking to live vehicles, and to allocate off-street spaces for dead
vehicles. Eno remarks on the two options:
The greatest opposition which we shall have to my recommendations (of limiting ranking) will be
from owners of cars who have no chauffeurs, who will claim that class legislation is being
proposed, whereas it is they who desire class legislation because what they want to do is to leave
their cars where they will be a nuisance and a menace.
And he predicts the use and creation of parking lots:
Vacant lots will be leased to store waiting vehicles and it will become profitable to construct
public garages where cars can be left during the day when people are attending to their business
and during the evening when they are at the theater. Some of these storage places will
undoubtedly be in the congested parts of cities and others a little way out where people will leave
their vehicles and proceed to their destination by street car, bus or taxi. This latter will be the
case, I believe, in some of our congested cities such as New York where it does not really pay to go
downtown in private cars.
How Long Can I Park Here?
Legal determination of what parking means came about with courts’ definition of “parked”
versus “moving” cars. One of the earliest known rulings was the 1812 case of Rex vs. Cross, in
England, in which the defendant was indicted for allowing his wagons to remain for too long on a
public street. The court indicated that “Every unauthorized obstruction of a highway to the
annoyance of the King’s subject is a nuisance. The King’s Highway is not to be used as a stable
yard.”
Curb Blowouts
A 1938 report by the Fisk Tire Company blamed 70 percent of tire failures on “one of the
American driver’s worst habits — jamming the tire against the curbstone through careless
parking.” The danger, this tire company declared, “lies in subsequent blowouts of damaged tires,
which may wreck a car and result in personal injuries and death. Such careless parking may also
knock front wheels out of alignment.”

The Dawn and Demise of Angled Parking
By the first decade of the 20th century, angled parking was advocated as the best
solution for parking and storing cars. This evolved naturally from the widespread
tradition of curbing horses and wagons perpendicular to the curb; cars followed suit.
With the growth of car ownership and the lack of ample space on main streets, angled
parking was haphazardly introduced on narrow city streets to increase capacity. The
result was often greater congestion, narrowing of driving lanes, and lack of passing
space. Cars backing out of the angled parking also increased the hazards for passing
cars.
With the growth of car ownership and the lack of ample space on main streets, angled
parking was haphazardly introduced on narrow city streets to increase capacity.

By the 1920s, a few cities had established specific dimensional standards. These included
minimum street widths, travel lanes and stall (parking space) dimensions. In New York
City, for example, measurements for angled parking stipulated that spaces should be at
90, 45, 37½, or 30 degrees to the curb, with an ideal width of not less than 7½ feet or
more than 8½ feet wide and a length of 12 to 14 feet (3.6 to 4.3 meters) depending on
the angle used.
By the mid-1950s the striving for efficiency of traffic movement and the push for reducing
points of conflict all but rendered angled parking a dangerous nuisance. Of particular
concern were cars that parked front first toward the curb, and upon leaving backed out
into oncoming traffic. Cities across the country outlawed its use and, with the surplus
space, either added or widened existing travel lanes. Curb parking (ranked) replaced
angled as the preferred solution of traffic engineers.

Off-Street Lots
In the 1920s, cities across America started to allocate space for parking lots that were either
owned and managed privately by commercial and retail associations or owned by public entities
and maintained by private operators. Some of these lots were within downtown areas, others
were located at city perimeters.
One of the earliest municipal lots was constructed in Los Angeles in 1922, followed by Flint,
Michigan in1924, and Chicago and Boston in 1930. In Pittsburgh in 1927, periphery lots that
could handle 900 cars, sited near the Allegheny River’s edge, charged ten cents per car for those
visiting or working downtown.
In 1923 the National Conference of City Planning encouraged municipalities to take planned and
rational action in allocating sites for off-street parking facilities. One of the first comprehensive
citywide parking plans was completed in Garden City, Long Island, in 1936. The first private
facility organized, constructed, and managed by the local commerce association within a city
center was in all likelihood built in Oakland, California, in 1929.
Parking at the Mall
It is no surprise that some of the earliest surface parking lots in the United States were designed
and built next to shopping centers. In 1923, the J. C. Nichols Company constructed two lots of
150-car capacity next to the new Country Club Plaza Shopping Center in Kansas City, Missouri.
According to Davis K. Jackson, the engineer who worked on its creation, “This was a radical
departure from the normal practice at that time, but it has since become widely accepted, and
large free parking areas are generally considered essential for any suburban development.”
Although Jackson advocated ample free parking, his actual design was sensitive to the overall
site conditions. He believed in smaller, “well-located” lots, and emphasized that “it is important
that parking lots not be too large.” “Otherwise,” he said, “there is a risk of serious interruption
to the retail continuity of the shops.” He describes the lot designs as “beautified . . . with
masonry walls, vines, flowers, trees, shrubs, and objects of art.” He endorsed the belief that
such expense is justified as part of creating an attractive shopping experience.

The First Parking Garage - 1917

Hotel La Salle Garage – Holabird and Roche, Architects

The Second Motor Age
Radburn
The Second Motor Age was introduced in 1929 with Radburn, the “town for the motor age” establishing the hierarchical street network (Cul de sac, Collector,
Arterial designations) adopted quickly by the emerging profession of traffic engineering.
The 1924 Standard State Zoning Enabling Act (SZEA) and the 1928 Standard City Planning Enabling Act (SCPEA)
The Department of Commerce published the enabling Acts for Zoning and Planning to establish national standards for zoning and subdivision regulation
to guide urban growth. These enabling acts standardized zoning and subdivision nationally.
Federal Housing Administration – Technical Bulletins -1938
Radburn’s influence extended into the Federal Housing Administration’s Technical Bulletins setting out standards for land subdivision for the new
automobile suburbs that replaced the simple lot, block, street structure of the street-car city.
Futurama – The 1939 New York World’s Fair
The Futurama Exhibition, designed by Norman Bel Geddes, attracted 30,000 people per day to experience the vision of a national network of highways that
would transform cities and would transform life in the second half of the 2th century.
The Green Book – Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1946
And the standards for building the automobile city were quickly applied to the cities emptied by the new suburban America. Suburbs, highways, and urban
renewal are the flip sides of the same coin.
The Ranch House - The Domestication of the Garage – Levitown, 1947 and after
The Housing Acts of 1937, 1949 and 1954 - Public Housing, Slum Clearance and Urban Renewal – (The Public Menace of Blight)
The National Interstate and Defense Highway Act, 1956
The highway, with federal funding, provided massive subsidies for building suburbia in every major American city.
Harland Bartholomew and the Theory of Zoning and City Planning Practice
Victor Gruen and Invention of the Shopping Mall, 1956

The Beginning - Streets
Charles Mulford Robinson – The Width
and Arrangement of Streets, 1911
Charles Mulford Robinson, one of the
primary advocates for the City Beautiful
Movement, was the first university
professor of Landscape Architecture and
the University of Illinois.
He wrote the first book on the design of
streets, distinguishing among business
streets and domestic streets and
criticizing the rectangular street platting
in the United States.
Combined with the later Radburn, his
work played an important role in the
design of the American suburb.

The Beginning – Parking

Elborough Street, Wandsworth, London, around 1900 and 2000

The Beginning - Radburn, New Jersey, 1929, And After
The ”Radburn Idea” is to answer the enigma “How to live with the auto”, or, if you will,
“how to live in spite of it’” met these difficulties with a radical revision of houses, roads,
paths, gardens, parks, blocks, and local neighborhoods.
1. The SUPERBLOCK in place of the characteristic narrow, rectangular block.
2. SPECIALIZED ROADS PLANNED AND BUILT FOR ONE USE INSTEAD OF FOR ALL USES:
service lanes for direct access to buildings; secondary collector roads around
superblocks; main through roads, linking the traffic of various sections, neighborhoods
and districts; express highways, or parkways, for connections with outside
communities. (Thus differentiating between movement, collection, service, parking
and visiting.)
3. COMPLETE SEPARATION OF PEDESTRIAN AND AUTOMOBILE, or as complete
separation as possible. Walks and paths routed at different places from roads and at
different levels when they cross. For this purpose, overpasses and underpasses were
used.
4. HOUSES TURNED AROUND. Living and sleeping rooms facing toward gardens and
parks; service rooms toward access roads.
5. PARK AS BACKBONE of the neighborhood. Large open areas in the center of
superblocks, joined together as a continuous park.
Geddes Smith described Radburn….in 1929 as:
A town built to live in – today and tomorrow. A town ‘for the motor age.” A town
turned outside-in – without any backdoors. A town where roads and parks fit together
like the fingers of your right and left hands. A town which children never dodge motortrucks on their way to school. A new town – newer then the garden cities, and the first
major innovation in town-planning since they were built.”

Radburn and After
The Federal Housing Administration Technical Bulletin’s - Planning Profitable Neighborhoods

Federal Housing
Administration –
Planning
Profitable
Neighborhoods
Radburn
becomes the
model for the
neighborhood
and begins
building the
automobile city

Futurama and the Vision for the Automobile City
General Motors Futurama,
New York World’s Fair, 1939
The Automobile and Modern Life

The Green Book
The Second Motor Age was fully developed with the publication of the first AASHTO
Green Book - A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, published in
1941. This book was essentially the law for traffic planning. The standards have been
adopted into FHWA funding, state funding of traffic improvements, and local public
works standards. Frequently, the only municipal public works standards will be
AASHTO standards.
Traffic Engineering has produced research that has improved streets and highway
safety and with many techniques – at great expense – including increasing the
maximum capacity of a single traffic lane to almost 1900 cars per hour, still at the
speed of 25 to 35 miles per hour. But there is still no economy of scale in expanding
the number of lanes. One lane still carries from 1500 to 1900 cars per hour maximum.

The National Interstate and Defense Highway Act, 1956

Atlanta Downtown Connector 1953

Downtown Connector, from the North Avenue Bridge, c. 1952 and 2004

Bird’s eye, 1892, and aerial photograph, c. 1966

The American Suburban House – The Domestication of the Garage
The house and house lot was
transformed in the Second Motor Age.
When the automobile moved inside the
house – the garage is just another room
– the back yard becomes a place of
recreation instead of a place of work.
The detached garage, the automobile
and the kitchen garden becomes a
playground. The interior of the house is
then oriented to the back yard. The
’great room” becomes the center of the
house, with living and dining rooms
remaining at the front – but only
residual spaces. The front porch
disappears with wider lots and the
absence of sidewalks.
The boundary between the pubic
domain and the private domain
becomes the entry gate – with a guard
or now. The street in the suburban
neighborhood becomes private.

The SZEA and the SCPEA – And the Future Form of the American City
HOOVER COMMISSION
1923
Congressional Approvals
1924-1928
A STANDARD ZONING ENABLING ACT
1924

A STANDARD CITY PLANNING ENABLING ACT
1928

Standard Zoning Enabling Act - SZEA – 1924-26
Edward Bassett was chairman of the Heights of Buildings Commission in New York City, which
prepared the 1916 Zoning Resolution. He consequently served as counsel to the NYC Board
of Adjustment. He was appointed to the Advisory Committee on City Planning and Zoning by
Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover and was a primary author of the Standard Zoning
Enabling and the Standard City Planning Enabling Acts.
Bassett clearly saw the importance of zoning in relationship to the NYC official map, which
was the current status of the 1811 Commissioners’ Plan and its survey and platting of blocks
and streets. For Basset, the control of buildings height, coverage and use were issues that
needed to be addressed within the framework established already by the official map.
The words in the SZEA require a zoning map for all land in the subject city. The zoning map
was to be officially adopted. This was clearly intended to have the zoning map, which
applies in the present, based on a plan for the future that would provide the rationale for
the zoning of private property.

Bassett’s suggested wording was for “a well considered plan,” left open
what exactly that plan might be, which was to be addressed in the
SCPEA, which was adopted later due to the pressing demands of new
zoning ordinances and court challenges across the country. During the
final edits, the label – “comprehensive plan” – was inserted by Harland
Bartholomew or Alfred Bettman, two other members of the
Commission. Nowhere was this label “comprehensive plan” defined.
As the SZEA was being written, court challenges to new zoning ordinances across the country,
most of which followed the format of the 1916 NYC Zoning Resolution, were progressing.
Some were upheld by the 14th and 15th Amendments, following the previous cases, but many
were turned down based on the same Amendments. This led, as expected, to the Supreme
Court.

Standard Zoning Enabling Act - Szea – 1924
Village Of Euclid Vs Ambler Realty – 1926
The village of Euclid had zoned an area of land held by Ambler Realty as a residential
neighborhood. Ambler argued he could lease the land for industrial uses and make
more money, and he was not being compensated. Lower courts ruled in favor of
Ambler based on the 5th (taking clause) and 14th (equal protection clause)
Amendments to the Constitution.
The Supreme Court overturned the lower courts, ruled in favor of Euclid, and
established a legal precedent for the regulation of use, density, and height of
improvements on private property on a city-wide basis. and ruling that a local
government may enact reasonable laws to keep the pig out of the parlor, even if
pigs may not be prohibited from the entire community. A pig in the parlor is not the
same as a pig in the barnyard.
The Court basically adopted the 1916 NYC Zoning Resolution.

In short, the court ruled that
a local government may
enact reasonable laws to
keep the pig out of the parlor,
even if pigs may not be
prohibited from the entire
community. A pig in the
parlor is not the same as a
pig in the barnyard.

The Court accepted the two main arguments presented by the Village of Euclid.
-

First was to clarify applications of Nuisance Law in that zoning provided advance
notice that certain types of uses were incompatible with other uses in a
particular district. (This resolves conflicts of zoning with individual to individual
disputes over land uses).

-

Second was to argue that zoning falls under Police Power as a necessary
municipal planning and management instrument. (This makes clear the the
Health, Safety and Welfare of a community may be enforced by a local
government over the objection of individuals, which followed from prior
precedents – San Francisco, Los Angeles, Boston, New York and and so on).

Or, an apartment building in
a single-family district can be
prohibited, even if an
apartment building is
appropriate in another
district.

Harland Bartholomew and the Theory of Zoning and City Planning Practice
Bartholomew set out a ”Theory of Zoning” in his 1932 book – Urban Land Uses. He was an
early planning consultant, preparing comprehensive plans and zoning maps and ordinances for
dozens of cities in the 1920’s, all while he served as the planning commissioner in St. Louis.
His work, making sure municipalities were conforming to the SZEA and Euclid, focused on
calculating percentages of existing land uses in the cities where he was working. By doing so,
he could then mathematically project quantities and areas of new land uses based on
projections of population growth. (If the average acres of existing retail land use per 1000
people were X, then a future land use plan should show X acres of retail land use for each 1000
people in future growth projections). Land use by type was then the basis of the zoning plan,
the boundaries of zoning districts, and the regulations of the designated land uses within
each district.
Bartholomew created a revolution of urban form:
Land use projections, supporting a SZEA Zoning Plan, became the primary focus of planning
and regulations to maintain the legal basis of zoning.
Subdivision regulations from the SCPEA Master Plan then follow and conform to land uses
regulations. A “master plan” like Penn’s Philadelphia or Oglethorpe’s Savannah or the 1911
Commissioner’s Plan no longer exists.
For example, a single-family residential district has zoning regulations tied specifically to the
land use requirements of that district – including lot size and dimension, setbacks from
property boundaries, house type and density, street design and parking.
And for example, a commercial district has zoning regulations tied specifically to the land use
requirements of that district – including the specific use (like a restaurant), lot size and
dimension, setbacks from property lines, building height and density and PARKING

The Bartholomew Effect
In Dekalb County, this area was designated as “low density residential” on a future land use map. The related zoning map showed R-85 everywhere except for the
intersection of Wesley Chapel Road, which was zoned C-1. Developers then acquired the surrounding agricultural land and requested re-zoning into varying districts
based on their individual plans and market studies – townhouses, apartments, retail centers, etc. The land use map was then adjusted for the zoning changes so the
two maps corresponded, a legal requirement for zoning.
A zoning district – R-85, for example – allowed only single family detached houses, 10,000 sf minimum lots, a 30-foot front yard minimum, 15 foot side yards
minimum, etc. C-R-1, for example – allowed only commercial retail uses, with specific building setbacks, parking requirements, loading areas, etc.
Subdivision regulations, following the standards set by FHA in the the 1930’s (and the ”Radburn Idea”) established the urban structure in the subdivision plat.
These set minimum intersection distances, limits on through traffic, dis-allowing a street in one subdivision plat to connect to another, incentives for cul-de-sacs,
etc.

In Dekalb County, the Atlanta Region, and essentially in all of America, land uses come first. Philadelphia is obviously
opposite. The urban structure – the Penn-Holme Plan - came first, land uses after, as the city developed over a period of 350
years. This same Bartholomew Effect can be found in Savannah and every other metropolitan area in the United States.

Zoning Map and Urban Structure: Dekalb County, Georgia and Center City Philadelphia

The Invention of the Shopping Mall
Victor Gruen and Southdale Mall

https://vimeo.com/47459551
The Gruen Effect - Trailer

The High Cost of Free Parking

A Sample of Parking Requirements

Percentage of land in parking lots versus land in all other uses, including all other land uses – Major US Cities
(data for Atlanta is missing – we can assume it is similar to Houston and less than Los Angeles)

Southlake Mall and Surroundings

Building Footprints

Parking Lot Footprints

Required by specific minimum parking requirements for each building use.

Southlake Mall and Surroundings

Pedestrian Movement from Parking to Building Entries

Pedestrian Sidewalks Exclusively on private property

The result of specific parking requirements for each building use

Southlake Mall and Surroundings

Public Sidewalks in Public Right of Way

Parking Footprints, excluding buildings, public rights of way and green space

Sidewalks Located on Private Parcels and Buildings

The High Cost of Free Parking

Why Do American Cities Look Like This?
Subdivision Regulation – from the SCPEA

The purpose of the Master Plan and Subdivision Regulations, according to the SCPEA is to plan the public domain in advance of private
development, including the boundaries of streets, parks, public buildings and other public spaces and places.
Today, in most cities, a master plan does not set out the public domain in advance for three reasons. Legally, a land use plan, not a plan for the
public domain, is required to support a zoning plan. And, legally, a city cannot designate land for public acquisition or private land without
completing that acquisition within a limited amount of time – a few years at most. Cities are unwilling to act that far in advance. Third, cities
increasingly export the cost of acquiring and building the public domain to private developers, who then follow plan the “public” domain within
their private properties.
This results in land use regulations for each zoning district determine the design of the public domain, except for highways and major and minor
arterial roads and regional parks. The Master Plan is oriented to land uses and zoning, not the building of a public domain.

Zoning – from SZEA and Euclid v. Ambler Realty

Justice Sutherland, who wrote the Euclid decision - , was concerned primarily with land use issues, not the other issues in the NYC 1916 Zoning
Resolution – building height, coverage, density, etc. And his primary concern was the protection of single-family neighborhoods and restricting any
mixture of apartment buildings. He also did not reference that zoning in NYC and other cities’ overlaid on a Master Plan of the public domain, like
the 1811 Commissioners Plan.
When the legality of zoning is primarily concerned with land uses – and the separation of uses as argued by Sutherland – the Master Plan becomes
a mirror of the Zoning Plan. This is the opposite of the history of urban form, especially in the US where plans for the public domain – New York,
Philadelphia, Savannah, Detroit, New Orleans, San Francisco and hundreds of others – always preceded any designation of uses.

Parking Regulations – emerging from standard zoning, city planning policy, and traffic engineering.

The purpose of streets is to provide access to private property and mobility within and through the city and at the beginning of the First Motor age,
the street (meaning the public domain) also served for the storage of automobiles – parking. When traffic volumes became an issue, parking was
exported to zoning and built on private parcels and private uses. With parking part of private development – like shopping malls – parking
requirements were sized to accommodate the traffic generated by the uses – at peak days and hours. For example, Black Friday at shopping malls
or the Saturday and Sunday before Thanksgiving for supermarkets. Thus, everyone pays for parking on private parcels through the prices of
clothing or groceries or any other product that is part urban development.

Lite Video – 6 minutes - Are Parking Lots Ruining Your City?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vUhOFUQDLQk

William Eno

Edward Basset

Harland Bartholmew

Victor Gruen

The High Cost of Free Parking and the Automobile City
The School of Architecture - Georgia Institute of Technology
ARCH4151 + ARCH7151 - HISTORY OF URBAN FORM

Read on if you want to know more about urban regulations and legal issues concerning regulations.

Law, codes and regulation has always been part of the creation of urban form

TheTHIS$IS$NOT$A$RECENT$PROBLEM$
Code of Hammurabi, 1755-1750 BCE

$ best-preserved legal text from the ancient near east, probably written by Hammurabi,
The
Code$of$Hammurabi$–$1772$BC$
the
sixth king of the First Dynasty of Babylon

Code$of$Hammurabi$–$1772$BC$]$Exerpt$
§$228.$If$a$builder$has$built$a$house$for$a$man$and$has$completed$it,$
he$shall$give$him$as$his$fee$two$shekels$of$silver$per$sar$of$house.$
$
§$229.$If$a$builder$has$built$a$house$for$a$man$and$has$not$made$
strong$his$work,$and$the$house$he$built$has$fallen,$and$he$has$caused$
the$death$of$the$owner$of$the$house,$that$builder$shall$be$put$to$death.$
$
§$230.$If$he$has$caused$the$son$of$the$owner$of$the$house$to$die,$one$
shall$put$to$death$the$son$of$that$builder.$
$
§$231.$If$he$has$caused$the$slave$of$the$owner$of$the$house$to$die,$he$
shall$give$slave$for$slave$to$the$owner$of$the$house.$
$
§$232.$If$he$has$caused$the$loss$of$goods,$he$shall$render$back$
whatever$he$has$caused$the$loss$of,$and$because$he$did$not$make$
strong$the$house$he$built,$and$it$fell,$from$his$own$goods$he$shall$
rebuild$the$house$that$fell.$
$
§$233.$If$a$builder$has$built$a$house$for$a$man,$and$has$not$jointed$
his$work,$and$the$wall$has$fallen,$that$builder$at$his$own$cost$shall$
make$good$that$wall.$

The Legal Basis for Regulating Urban Form in the U.S.

Common Law:
Common Law originated in 12th and 13th century England and later spread through the colonies, including the Americas. As
a legal system, it is characterized by traditional settlements of conflicts and then what is called case law developed by
judges and courts, where judicial decisions in individual cases become precedents for future cases.
Common Law becomes Statuary Law when it is written and formally adopted.
Constitutional Law sets out the framework for interpreting Statuary Law and Common Law disputes.
(Note – there is also Civil Law, which is contrasted with Common Law. Civil Law is derived from Roman Law and
is the basis of the legal systems of the European Continent – and the State of Louisiana in the US by way of the
Napoleonic Code established in 1804). Canon Law is the law of the Roman Church that was in conflict with
common law until the French Revolution and the foundation of Civil Law, which is statuary (written) in its entirety.
Some areas of Common Law:
1.Riparian Law: Water. You own the land under the water but you do not own the water. The water is held in common. You
can use the water, but you have to put it back in same amount and condition as it was before you used it. This law is in force
only in the Eastern United States. In the West, water rights are based on Prior Appropriation – meaning water rights go to
the person who first withdraws water for a productive use.
2.Nuisance Law: You cannot engage in an activity that restricts or causes a restriction on the expected and reasonable use
of another person’s property. This is the core of civil law – it is based on the individual, not the community. Complaint is for
nuisance to the individual toward another individual. A water user to a water user. A land owner against an individual
trespasser. A swimming pool that leaks on the neighbors yard spreading mud on his parking space.
3. Police Power: Government has the power to enact laws governing the public and individuals. This power is granted to the
states and local governments by the 10th Amendment and deals primarily with the public Health, Safety and Welfare. HSW
is the core of the Police Power of government, meaning it deals with the individual in conflict with the good of the
community – as defined by the community. The application of such laws are subject to judicial review, unlike Statuary Law,
which is reviewed for its Constitutional basis.

Major Events in the development of urban form regulations in the U.S.
1885 – San Francisco – Excluded laundries from residential neighborhoods. Overturned by Supreme Court 1886 (Yick Wo vs
Hopkins) based on the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment applied to Chinese residents of the U.S.
1898 – Boston – 80-foot height restriction around Copley Square. Confirmed by Supreme Court 1909 (Welsh vs Swasey)
1901 – New Tenement House Law and Tenement House Reform Movement.
1908 – Los Angeles – 1908 District Law – land use regulations on entire city. U.S. Supreme Court (Hatachek Decision)
confirmed district zoning by use as not a taking.
1910 – Washington, DC – Height of Building Act - height based on street width.
1916 – New York City Zoning Resolution, the first comprehensive zoning ordinance.
1916-1928 – Numerous court cases relating to the ”street bed” (the layout of streets and the legality of public
acquisitions for future street rights of way – questions of eminent domain and the taking clause of the 5th
Amendment)
1917 – Supreme Court overturns racial zoning (Buchanan v Warley). This invalidated Atlanta’s 1912-1913 zoning
districts designated for African Americans, the so-called “colored districts.”
1916-1925 – Zoning spreads to more than 100 cities.
1924 - Standard Zoning Enabling Act (SZEA) authorizes zoning, zoning practice and the necessity for a comprehensive plan.
1926 - Village of Euclid, Ohio versus Ambler Realty Co. US Supreme Court decision confirming legality of zoning.
1926 – States adopt of SZEA – Atlanta adopts first zoning ordinance.
1928 – Standard City Planning Enabling Act (SCPEA) authorizes subdivision regulations and requires the Master Plan.
1929 – Radburn, New Jersey
1932 – Harland Bartholomew – Urban Land Uses . Describes a “Theory of Zoning” which establishes city planning
practice.
1935 – FHA technical bulletins (following the Radburn Idea) become basis of local subdivision regulations.
1958-61 – New York City Zoning Resolution, consolidating ”incentive zoning, FAR, and TDR.”
1982 – Form Based Codes (Seaside Code -private) and later public Form Based Codes/Smart Codes.

1885-6 Yick-Wo vs Hopkins – Equal Protection and the Challenge of Regulating Urban Form
In 1886, Sheriff Hopkins entered the Yick Wo laundry in San Francisco . The sheriff had a warrant for the arrest of the
owner. The warrant said he had broken the law. A San Francisco ordinance said that all laundries had to be operated in
brick buildings. The Yick Wo laundry was in a wooden building, and wooden buildings were more vulnerable to fires. But
there was one problem: of San Francisco’s 320 laundries, 310 were in wooden buildings and 240 were owned by
Chinese persons. During the Gold Rush, the men who flocked to California needed to get their clothes washed.
Traditionally, in Europe and America, women were expected to to wash clothes. So most of these miners would not
wash their own clothes. But Chinese men would.
The sheriff arrested almost all of the Chinese who operated from
wooden buildings but arrested only one white person. Mr Yick took his
case, eventually, to the supreme court. In Yick-Wo versus Hopkins, the
Supreme Court found: "The Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution
is not confined to the protection of citizens. (Nor shall any state deprive
any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor
deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the
laws).
The fundamental issue was an ordinance that on its face regulated for
the health, safety and welfare of the city, due to the possibility of fires
spreading from wooden buildings used for laundries. But in its
administration, it violated the 14th Amendment and equal protection
for Chinese residents, whether citizens or not and whether owners of
laundries or not.

This decision confirmed the necessary separation
between statuary law regulating land use and urban
form versus fundamental rights protected by the
Constitution.

Boston - 1898 Height Restriction at Copley Square and Regulating for a Public Purpose
The Supreme Court upheld the Boston height ordinance in Welsh v. Swasey. The Court declared that Boston acted for a
public purpose – protecting the public value of the square and library by limiting the height of surrounding buildings on
private property.
The City of Boston Height Ordinance set
the maximum building height of 80 feet
for any building in the blocks
immediately surrounding Copley Square
and the City Library. (Also H.H.
Richardson’s Trinity Church). Other areas
of the City had a height limit of 100 feet.
Francis Welsh was denied a permit to
built a building 124 feet high. He sued
claiming that the police power had been
abused and that the City’s control was
solely for aesthetic purposes.
The ordinance stated that if there was
any damage to surrounding property, the
owners would be compensated
according to procedures for the laying
out and building streets, thus complying
with the 5th Amendment, concerning
”taking” and “just compensation.”

This decision confirmed that land use and urban form may be regulated by cities, if based on
a public purpose. Aesthetics may be broadly applied as a public purpose.

New York 1901 - Tenement House Reform Law and Public Health, Morals and Safety
In the 19th c. New York led in tenement house law, adopting regulations to address the worst housing conditions of the
huge immigrant population flowing into the city. But enforcement was negligible, usually said to be the result of political
power and corruption of Tammany Hall.
The Knickerbocker House was the earliest standard form – a single family house on the 25-foot wide NYC building lot.
Over time, these standard types expanded to include a separate building on the rear of the lot. Then the building itself
expanded to cover essentially all of the 25x100 foot lot with a building with 6-7 floors high with single room apartments
sometimes housing multiple families in each apartment. This was the conditions that Jacob Riis exposed and supported
Lawrence Veiller’s to campaign for reform and write – and saw adopted - the New Tenement House Law of 1901, which
required windows for every sleeping rooms, two indoor toilets on each floor and a minimum site size of two 25x100 foot
NYC lots. (see next slide).
The law was challenged in New York
Tenement House Department v.
Moeschen in 1901 and decided in favor
of New York and subsequently upheld by
the Supreme Court.
Although narrowly argued about the two
toilets versus a “school sink” (a single
privy in the yard used by more than a
hundred tenants each day and seldom
maintained), the decision upheld the

legislative right to favor the public’s
preservation of health, morals and
safety through the police power,

Thus, it affirmed an expanded breadth of the police power to regulate urban form
(without violating the takings clause of the 5th Amendment).

New York Tenement Law from Knickerbocker House to Old Law to New Law. Light and air required with emerging concern for lot coverage.

1908 Los Angeles District Law and the Regulating Land Use by Use District
Hadacheck v. Los Angeles, 1915
The 1908 Los Angeles District Law established residential and industrial districts in Los Angles, for the purpose of
separating residences from conflicting industrial uses. These districts covered the entire city.
Three court cases resulted:
Exclusion of a Chinese Hand
Laundry, a lumber yard, and
a brick yard. Mr.
Hadacheck, owner of the
brick yard, was forced to
move his business from a
residence district to an
industrial district at his own
expense.
The U.S. Supreme Court
upheld the Los Angeles law
based on the application of
police power for a public
purpose, in conformance
with the 14th Amendment.
The use district approach
to zoning and land use
control soon spread across
the U.S..

The Hadacheck Decision confirmed the broadened use of the police power for the entire
city, not just a limited area or district or building type.

1899-1910 - Height of Buildings Acts, Washington, D.C.
The Cairo Hotel (an apartment building) is the tallest residential
building (164 feet) in Washington D.C. Built in 1894, protests
occurred soon after its construction and led to the 1899
Washington Height of Buildings Act that was further developed
and adopted by Congress in 1910.
The1899 height limit was set at 90 feet for residential streets
and 110 feet for commercial streets. The 1910 Height of
Buildings Act set the height limit to equal the width of the street
right of way plus 20 feet up to a maximum of 90 feet on
residential streets, 130 feet on commercial streets and 160 feet
on parts of Pennsylvania Avenue.
The basis of the law was the police power doctrine for
protecting – health, safety and welfare. Specifically, the law
referenced the danger of fire in the new steel frame high-rise
buildings, which Congress believed were not safe and a danger
to the significance of the National Capitol.
Actually, the law was simply an update of the original
regulations set out by the District of Columbia Commissioners
who were supervising L’Enfant and Ellicott’s plan for the
Capitol City. Those first regulations for buildings in the new
Capitol were issued by George Washington.
The law has been amended numerous times, but the overall
framework of width of street to height remains.
It is a myth that the height limit is the U.S. Capitol building.

1916 New York City Zoning Resolution – The First Comprehensive Zoning Regulations

One Argument for the 1916 Zoning Resolution:
The Equitable Building
In 1915, when the 42-story Equitable Building was erected in
Lower Manhattan, the need for controls on the height and form
of all buildings became clear. Rising without setbacks to its full
height of 538 feet, the Equitable Building cast a seven-acre
shadow over neighboring buildings, affecting their value and
setting the stage for the nation’s first comprehensive zoning
resolution.

Another Argument for the 1916 Zoning Resolution:
Fifth Avenue – “The Ladies Mile” versus the Garment District
Other forces were also at work during the same period. Housing shortages, caused by an influx of new immigrants, created
a market for tenements built to maximum bulk and minimum standards. Warehouses and factories began to encroach
upon the fashionable stores along Ladies’ Mile, edging uncomfortably close to Fifth Avenue.
Intrusions like these and the impacts of rapid growth added urgency to the calls of reformers to separate residential,
commercial and manufacturing uses and to regulate height and ground coverage.

New York Zoning Resolution, 1916 and the Commissioner’s Plan of 1811

The Heights of Buildings Commission, Chairman, Edward Bassett
The Commissioner’s Plan of 1811 had set out the framework of lots, blocks and
streets for the entire island. The emerging problems, as Bassett knew, were the form
of buildings and conflicts among uses. It was obvious that the control of buildings
and uses was an addition to, not a substitute for, the Commissioner’s Plan.

The 1916 New York Regulations
1916 New York City Zoning Resolution had three primary ingredients: Height, Area and Use Districts with each of these
drawn with different boundaries -- they are not congruent. Bassett and the Board of Estimate assumed that the legal
basis of zoning was within the police power doctrine, previously established by the Supreme Court. Conflicts were not to
be resolved between adjacent property owners or residents, based on nuisance law. Instead, the conflicts were between
the “community” (i.e. the City) and the offending owner or resident and thus governed by the City’s police power.

Three use districts – Residential, Commercial and Unrestricted. (Based on Hadacheck/Los Angeles)
Five height districts based on street width, which then regulates the sky exposure plane. (Based on Boston and DC)
Three area districts that regulate the area of the site that may be covered by a building, from 50% to 80% to
Unregulated. (Based on New York Tenement House Law of 1901))

NYC 1916 Resolution – Building Heights
Five height districts were established based on the
width of streets – 1, 1 ¼, 1 ½, 2, 2 ½ zones. This means
the height of the building wall on the street the building
fronted. Thus a 1 ½ zone for a 60 foot wide street could
have a 90 foot building front before a setback within
the defined setback line – the sky exposure plane.

Hugh Ferris – The Metropolis of Tomorrow

Ferris, a New York architect, speculated on the future form of skyscrapers, given the new regulations in the 1916 Zoning
Resolution. His book was internationally influential, even in Brooklyn and Shanghai, where there was no zoning or
building regulations.

The SZEA and the SCPEA – And the Future Form of the American City
HOOVER COMMISSION
1923
Congressional Approvals
1924-1928
A STANDARD ZONING ENABLING ACT
1924

A STANDARD CITY PLANNING ENABLING ACT
1928

Standard Zoning Enabling Act - SZEA – 1924-26
Edward Bassett was chairman of the Heights of Buildings Commission in New York City, which
prepared the 1916 Zoning Resolution. He consequently served as counsel to the NYC Board
of Adjustment. He was appointed to the Advisory Committee on City Planning and Zoning by
Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover and was a primary author of the Standard Zoning
Enabling and the Standard City Planning Enabling Acts.
Bassett clearly saw the importance of zoning in relationship to the NYC official map, which
was the current status of the 1811 Commissioners’ Plan and its survey and platting of blocks
and streets. For Basset, the control of buildings height, coverage and use were issues that
needed to be addressed within the framework established already by the official map.
The words in the SZEA require a zoning map for all land in the subject city. The zoning map
was to be officially adopted. This was clearly intended to have the zoning map, which
applies in the present, based on a plan for the future that would provide the rationale for
the zoning of private property.

Bassett’s suggested wording was for “a well considered plan,” left open
what exactly that plan might be, which was to be addressed in the
SCPEA, which was adopted later due to the pressing demands of new
zoning ordinances and court challenges across the country. During the
final edits, the label – “comprehensive plan” – was inserted by Harland
Bartholomew or Alfred Bettman, two other members of the
Commission. Nowhere was this label “comprehensive plan” defined.
As the SZEA was being written, court challenges to new zoning ordinances across the country,
most of which followed the format of the 1916 NYC Zoning Resolution, were progressing.
Some were upheld by the 14th and 15th Amendments, following the previous cases, but many
were turned down based on the same Amendments. This led, as expected, to the Supreme
Court.

Standard Zoning Enabling Act - Szea – 1924
Village Of Euclid Vs Ambler Realty – 1926

The legal basis of zoning (including the 1916 NYC Zoning Resolution and many others across
the US) was ruled favorably by the Supreme Court in the Case of Eubclid v. Ambler Realty in
1926.

Euclid vs Ambler Realty

In 1926, the US Supreme Court upheld zoning as a right of the States, via their cities and counties.
The village of Euclid had zoned an area of land held by Ambler Realty as a residential neighborhood. Ambler argued that it
would lose money because if the land could be leased to industrial users. Ambler argued that he was not being
compensated for his potential loss of income. Lower courts ruled in favor of Ambler based on the 5th (taking clause) and
14th (equal protection clause) Amendments to the Constitution.
The Supreme Court overturned the lower courts, ruled in favor of Euclid and established a legal precedent for the
regulation of use, density, and height of improvements on private property on a city-wide basis, extending the prior
ruling in Hadacheck and, basically, adopting the argument for the 1916 NYC Zoning Resolution.
The Court accepted the two main arguments presented by the Village of Euclid.
-

First was to clarify applications of Nuisance Law in that zoning provided advance notice that certain types of uses were
incompatible with other uses in a particular district. (This resolves conflicts of zoning with individual to individual
disputes over land uses).

-

Second was to argue that zoning falls under Police Power as a necessary municipal planning and management
instrument. (This makes clear the the Health, Safety and Welfare of a community may be enforced by a local
government over the objection of individuals, which followed from prior precedents – San Francisco, Los Angeles,
Boston, New York and and so on).

Euclid vs Ambler Realty

In short, the court ruled that a
local government may enact
reasonable laws to keep the pig
out of the parlor, even if pigs may
not be prohibited from the entire
community. A pig in the parlor is
not the same as a pig in the
barnyard.
Or, an apartment building in a
single-family district can be
prohibited, even if an apartment
building is appropriate in another
district.

Although little pigs may be acceptable as pets in
the parlor or the back yard, if allowed by the City,
under the police power. If not allowed by the
police power, then nuisance law would prevail
with neighbor fighting neighbor over pig poop.

Justice Southerland and Zoning as a Tool for Regulating Land Uses
Quote from Justice Sutherland’s Opinion of the Court in support of the Village of Euclid in Euclid vs Ambler
(remember that the issue at hand was the residential vs industrial situation):
[T]he coming of one apartment house, if followed by others, interfering by their height and bulk with the free
circulation of air and monopolizing the rays of the sun . . . and bringing . . . the disturbing noises incident to increased
traffic . . . and the occupation, by means of moving and parked automobiles, of larger portions of the street, thus
detracting from their safety . . . until, finally, the residential character of the neighborhood and its desirability . . . are
utterly destroyed. . . the reasons are sufficiently cogent to preclude us from saying . . . that such provisions are clearly
arbitrary and unreasonable, having no substantial relation to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare.”
This, and the remainder of Justice Sutherlands Opinion, has a primary focus on the uses of private property and the use
of the Police Power to eliminate conflicts between those uses. He made only offhand references regulations of building
area, height, (height plus area = density) which regulate the form of the city, not simply the uses of private land. The
City of Euclid’s ordinance was essentially the same as the 1916 NYC Zoning Resolution, but this larger inter-related use,
height, area) framework was ignored. And, more important, the Court ignored the relationship between the

NYC Zoning Resolution that regulated private building and the 1811 Commissioners Plan that
established the prior framework of the public domain within which private buildings were to be built.

The Standard Zoning Enabling Act was officially published in 1926, authorizing states to
authorize cities to adopt zoning ordinances for the regulation of private land. But the
second of the Hoover Commission’s recommendations – the Standard City Planning
Enabling Act – had not yet been written or published.
Some would argue that this fact, and Justice Southerland’s focus almost exclusively on use
instead of building form, condemned the American City to prioritize land use and private
property over the street and block framework that established the public domain of the
city.

The 1928 Standard City Planning Enabling Act and the Master Plan
SCPEA had several purposes. The most
important, relative to the design of cities
was:
•

The power to adopt a Master Plan for
the future physical development of the
city. This was essentially the power to
plan and regulate the public domain –
streets, blocks and infrastructure –
including the ability to acquire property
for those purposes with the powers of
eminent domain, as regulated by the 5th
Amendment.

•

The power to regulate the subdivision
of private land in keeping with that
Master Plan – that is, the arrangement
of lots and blocks and street rights of
way for future private development to
accommodate public infrastructure.

The definition of the Master Plan is clearly
akin to the Commissioner’s Plan of New
York and Bassett’s idea for zoning within a
“well considered plan.” It would establish a
framework for the future development of
the city based on lots and blocks and
streets.

